apps/docs/content/docs/runtimes/ai-sdk/v6.mdx, before:

---
title: AI SDK v6
description: Integrate Vercel AI SDK v6 with assistant-ui for streaming chat.
---


## Overview

Integration with the Vercel AI SDK v6 using the `useChatRuntime` hook from `@assistant-ui/react-ai-sdk`.

## Getting Started

<Steps>
  <Step>
  ### Create a Next.js project

```sh
npx create-next-app@latest my-app
cd my-app
```

  </Step>
  <Step>

### Install dependencies

<InstallCommand npm={["@assistant-ui/react", "@assistant-ui/react-ai-sdk", "ai@^6", "@ai-sdk/react@^3", "@ai-sdk/openai", "zod"]} />

  </Step>
  <Step>

### Setup a backend route under `/api/chat`

`@/app/api/chat/route.ts`

```tsx
import { openai } from "@ai-sdk/openai";
import {
  streamText,
  convertToModelMessages,
  tool,
  zodSchema,
} from "ai";
import type { UIMessage } from "ai";
import { z } from "zod";

export const maxDuration = 30;

export async function POST(req: Request) {
  const { messages }: { messages: UIMessage[] } = await req.json();

  const result = streamText({
    model: openai("gpt-4o"),
    messages: await convertToModelMessages(messages), // Note: async in v6
    tools: {
      get_current_weather: tool({
        description: "Get the current weather",
        inputSchema: zodSchema(
          z.object({
            city: z.string(),
          }),
        ),
        execute: async ({ city }) => {
          return `The weather in ${city} is sunny`;
        },
      }),
    },
  });

  return result.toUIMessageStreamResponse();
}
```

  </Step>
  <Step>

### Setup the frontend

`@/app/page.tsx`

```tsx
"use client";

import { Thread } from "@/components/assistant-ui/thread";
import { AssistantRuntimeProvider } from "@assistant-ui/react";
import { useChatRuntime } from "@assistant-ui/react-ai-sdk";

export default function Home() {
  const runtime = useChatRuntime();

  return (
    <AssistantRuntimeProvider runtime={runtime}>
      <div className="h-full">
        <Thread />
      </div>
    </AssistantRuntimeProvider>
  );
}
```

  </Step>
</Steps>

## Key Changes from v5

| Feature | v5 | v6 |
|---------|----|----|
| **ai package** | `ai@^5` | `ai@^6` |
| **@ai-sdk/react** | `@ai-sdk/react@^2` | `@ai-sdk/react@^3` |
| **convertToModelMessages** | Sync | Async (`await`) |
| **Tool schema** | `parameters: z.object({...})` | `inputSchema: zodSchema(z.object({...}))` |

## Component Message Parts

`@assistant-ui/react-ai-sdk` supports native component parts in two forms:

- direct UI part: `{ type: "component", name, props, parentId? }`
- data chunk form: `{ type: "data-component", data: { name, props, parentId? } }`

Both are converted to assistant-ui `type: "component"` parts and rendered via
`MessagePrimitive.Parts` `components.Component`.

## API Reference

### useChatRuntime

Creates a runtime integrated with AI SDK's `useChat` hook.

```tsx
import { useChatRuntime } from "@assistant-ui/react-ai-sdk";

const runtime = useChatRuntime({
  api: "/api/chat", // optional, defaults to "/api/chat"
});
```

### Custom API URL

```tsx
const runtime = useChatRuntime({
  api: "/my-custom-api/chat",
});
```

### Forwarding System Messages and Frontend Tools

Use `AssistantChatTransport` to automatically forward system messages and frontend tools to your backend:

```tsx
"use client";

import { useChatRuntime, AssistantChatTransport } from "@assistant-ui/react-ai-sdk";

const runtime = useChatRuntime({
  transport: new AssistantChatTransport({
    api: "/api/chat",
  }),
});
```

Backend route with system/tools forwarding:

```tsx
import { openai } from "@ai-sdk/openai";
import { streamText, convertToModelMessages, zodSchema } from "ai";
import type { UIMessage } from "ai";
import { frontendTools } from "@assistant-ui/react-ai-sdk";

export async function POST(req: Request) {
  const {
    messages,
    system,
    tools,
  }: {
    messages: UIMessage[];
    system?: string;
    tools?: any;
  } = await req.json();

  const result = streamText({
    model: openai("gpt-4o"),
    system,
    messages: await convertToModelMessages(messages),
    tools: {
      ...frontendTools(tools),
      // your backend tools...
    },
  });

  return result.toUIMessageStreamResponse();
}
```

### useAISDKRuntime (Advanced)

For advanced use cases where you need direct access to the `useChat` hook:

```tsx
import { useChat } from "@ai-sdk/react";
import { useAISDKRuntime } from "@assistant-ui/react-ai-sdk";

const chat = useChat();
const runtime = useAISDKRuntime(chat);
```

## Example

For a complete example, check out the [AI SDK v6 example](https://github.com/assistant-ui/assistant-ui/tree/main/examples/with-ai-sdk-v6) in our repository.

Commit message:

docs: reframe tambo as external-store bridge

apps/docs/content/docs/runtimes/ai-sdk/v6.mdx, after:

---
title: AI SDK v6
description: Integrate Vercel AI SDK v6 with assistant-ui for streaming chat.
---


## Overview

Integration with the Vercel AI SDK v6 using the `useChatRuntime` hook from `@assistant-ui/react-ai-sdk`.

## Getting Started

<Steps>
  <Step>
  ### Create a Next.js project

```sh
npx create-next-app@latest my-app
cd my-app
```

  </Step>
  <Step>

### Install dependencies

<InstallCommand npm={["@assistant-ui/react", "@assistant-ui/react-ai-sdk", "ai@^6", "@ai-sdk/react@^3", "@ai-sdk/openai", "zod"]} />

  </Step>
  <Step>

### Setup a backend route under `/api/chat`

`@/app/api/chat/route.ts`

```tsx
import { openai } from "@ai-sdk/openai";
import {
  streamText,
  convertToModelMessages,
  tool,
  zodSchema,
} from "ai";
import type { UIMessage } from "ai";
import { z } from "zod";

export const maxDuration = 30;

export async function POST(req: Request) {
  const { messages }: { messages: UIMessage[] } = await req.json();

  const result = streamText({
    model: openai("gpt-4o"),
    messages: await convertToModelMessages(messages), // Note: async in v6
    tools: {
      get_current_weather: tool({
        description: "Get the current weather",
        inputSchema: zodSchema(
          z.object({
            city: z.string(),
          }),
        ),
        execute: async ({ city }) => {
          return `The weather in ${city} is sunny`;
        },
      }),
    },
  });

  return result.toUIMessageStreamResponse();
}
```

  </Step>
  <Step>

### Setup the frontend

`@/app/page.tsx`

```tsx
"use client";

import { Thread } from "@/components/assistant-ui/thread";
import { AssistantRuntimeProvider } from "@assistant-ui/react";
import { useChatRuntime } from "@assistant-ui/react-ai-sdk";

export default function Home() {
  const runtime = useChatRuntime();

  return (
    <AssistantRuntimeProvider runtime={runtime}>
      <div className="h-full">
        <Thread />
      </div>
    </AssistantRuntimeProvider>
  );
}
```

  </Step>
</Steps>

## Key Changes from v5

| Feature | v5 | v6 |
|---------|----|----|
| **ai package** | `ai@^5` | `ai@^6` |
| **@ai-sdk/react** | `@ai-sdk/react@^2` | `@ai-sdk/react@^3` |
| **convertToModelMessages** | Sync | Async (`await`) |
| **Tool schema** | `parameters: z.object({...})` | `inputSchema: zodSchema(z.object({...}))` |

## Component Message Parts

`@assistant-ui/react-ai-sdk` supports native component parts in two forms:

- direct UI part: `{ type: "component", name, props, parentId? }`
- data chunk form: `{ type: "data-component", data: { name, props, parentId? } }`

Both are converted to assistant-ui `type: "component"` parts and rendered via
`MessagePrimitive.Parts` `components.Component`.

This is a core assistant-ui capability (not specific to any single backend
bridge): component parts are first-class in assistant-ui message types,
rendering primitives, and stream conversion paths.

## API Reference

### useChatRuntime

Creates a runtime integrated with AI SDK's `useChat` hook.

```tsx
import { useChatRuntime } from "@assistant-ui/react-ai-sdk";

const runtime = useChatRuntime({
  api: "/api/chat", // optional, defaults to "/api/chat"
});
```

### Custom API URL

```tsx
const runtime = useChatRuntime({
  api: "/my-custom-api/chat",
});
```

### Forwarding System Messages and Frontend Tools

Use `AssistantChatTransport` to automatically forward system messages and frontend tools to your backend:

```tsx
"use client";

import { useChatRuntime, AssistantChatTransport } from "@assistant-ui/react-ai-sdk";

const runtime = useChatRuntime({
  transport: new AssistantChatTransport({
    api: "/api/chat",
  }),
});
```

Backend route with system/tools forwarding:

```tsx
import { openai } from "@ai-sdk/openai";
import { streamText, convertToModelMessages, zodSchema } from "ai";
import type { UIMessage } from "ai";
import { frontendTools } from "@assistant-ui/react-ai-sdk";

export async function POST(req: Request) {
  const {
    messages,
    system,
    tools,
  }: {
    messages: UIMessage[];
    system?: string;
    tools?: any;
  } = await req.json();

  const result = streamText({
    model: openai("gpt-4o"),
    system,
    messages: await convertToModelMessages(messages),
    tools: {
      ...frontendTools(tools),
      // your backend tools...
    },
  });

  return result.toUIMessageStreamResponse();
}
```

### useAISDKRuntime (Advanced)

For advanced use cases where you need direct access to the `useChat` hook:

```tsx
import { useChat } from "@ai-sdk/react";
import { useAISDKRuntime } from "@assistant-ui/react-ai-sdk";

const chat = useChat();
const runtime = useAISDKRuntime(chat);
```

## Example

For a complete example, check out the [AI SDK v6 example](https://github.com/assistant-ui/assistant-ui/tree/main/examples/with-ai-sdk-v6) in our repository.
