apps/docs/content/docs/cloud/overview.mdx, before:

---
title: Overview
description: Hosted service for thread management, chat history, and user authentication.
---

Assistant Cloud is a hosted service built for assistant-ui frontends that offers comprehensive thread management and message history. It automatically persists threads, supports human-in-the-loop workflows, and integrates with common auth providers to seamlessly allow users to resume conversations at any point.


## Features

### Thread management

Using our `<ThreadList />` component, show the users a list of conversations. Allow the users to seamlessly switch between conversations and even let long running tasks run in the background.

Assistant Cloud automatically persists a list of threads and corresponding metadata. It also automatically generates a title for conversations based on the initial messages.

Supported backends:

- AI SDK
- LangGraph
- Custom

### Chat history

For every conversation, Assistant Cloud can store the history of messages, allowing the user to resume the conversation at any point in time.
This supports human in the loop workflows, where the execution of an agent is interrupted until user feedback is collected.

Supported backends:

- AI SDK
- LangGraph
- Custom (currently only Local Runtime)

### Authorization

Assistant Cloud integrates with your auth provider (Clerk, Auth0, Supabase, Firebase, ...) to identify your users and authorize them to access just the conversations they are allowed to see.

Supported auth providers:

- Clerk
- Auth0
- Supabase
- Firebase
- Your own

## Getting Started

To get started, create an account at [Assistant Cloud Dashboard](https://cloud.assistant-ui.com/) and follow one of the walkthroughs for your preferred backend:

- [AI SDK](/docs/cloud/persistence/ai-sdk)
- [LangGraph](/docs/cloud/persistence/langgraph)

You can also check out our example repositories to see how to integrate Assistant Cloud with your frontend:

- [With AI SDK](https://github.com/assistant-ui/assistant-ui/tree/main/examples/with-cloud)
- [With LangGraph](https://github.com/assistant-ui/assistant-ui/tree/main/examples/with-langgraph)

Commit message:

docs(cloud): add standalone AI SDK hooks documentation docs(cloud): restructure to framework-first flat layout fix: address review feedback (loading state leak, retry race, error handling, file warning, changeset) chore: fix lint warning in Composer (autoFocus a11y)

apps/docs/content/docs/cloud/overview.mdx, after:

---
title: Overview
description: Hosted service for thread management, chat history, and user authentication.
---

Assistant Cloud is a hosted service that provides thread management and message history for AI chat applications. It automatically persists threads, supports human-in-the-loop workflows, and integrates with common auth providers to seamlessly allow users to resume conversations at any point. Works with any React UI — with or without assistant-ui components.


## Features

### Thread management

Using our `<ThreadList />` component, show the users a list of conversations. Allow the users to seamlessly switch between conversations and even let long running tasks run in the background.

Assistant Cloud automatically persists a list of threads and corresponding metadata. It also automatically generates a title for conversations based on the initial messages.

Supported backends:

- AI SDK
- LangGraph
- Custom

### Chat history

For every conversation, Assistant Cloud can store the history of messages, allowing the user to resume the conversation at any point in time.
This supports human in the loop workflows, where the execution of an agent is interrupted until user feedback is collected.

Supported backends:

- AI SDK
- LangGraph
- Custom (currently only Local Runtime)

### Authorization

Assistant Cloud integrates with your auth provider (Clerk, Auth0, Supabase, Firebase, ...) to identify your users and authorize them to access just the conversations they are allowed to see.

Supported auth providers:

- Clerk
- Auth0
- Supabase
- Firebase
- Your own

## Getting Started

To get started, create an account at [Assistant Cloud Dashboard](https://cloud.assistant-ui.com/) and follow one of the walkthroughs for your preferred backend:

- [AI SDK](/docs/cloud/ai-sdk) — two hooks, bring your own UI
- [AI SDK + assistant-ui](/docs/cloud/ai-sdk-assistant-ui) — full integration with pre-built components
- [LangGraph + assistant-ui](/docs/cloud/langgraph)

You can also check out our example repositories to see how to integrate Assistant Cloud with your frontend:

- [AI SDK (standalone)](https://github.com/assistant-ui/assistant-ui/tree/main/examples/with-cloud-ai-sdk)
- [AI SDK + assistant-ui](https://github.com/assistant-ui/assistant-ui/tree/main/examples/with-cloud)
- [LangGraph + assistant-ui](https://github.com/assistant-ui/assistant-ui/tree/main/examples/with-langgraph)
