apps/docs/content/docs/(reference)/api-reference/primitives/message.mdx, before:

---
title: MessagePrimitive
description: Components for rendering message content, parts, and attachments.
---

A single message in a conversation. Messages may consist of multiple parts.


## Anatomy

```tsx
import { MessagePrimitive } from "@assistant-ui/react";

const UserMessage = () => (
  <MessagePrimitive.Root>
    User: <MessagePrimitive.Parts />
    <BranchPicker />
    <ActionBar />
  </MessagePrimitive.Root>
);

const AssistantMessage = () => (
  <MessagePrimitive.Root>
    Assistant: <MessagePrimitive.Parts />
    <BranchPicker />
    <ActionBar />
  </MessagePrimitive.Root>
);
```

## API Reference

### Root

Containts all parts of the message.

This primitive renders a `<div>` element unless `asChild` is set.

<ParametersTable
  type="MessagePrimitiveRootProps"
  parameters={[
    {
      name: "asChild",
    },
  ]}
/>

### Parts

The content of the message. This renders a separate component for each content part of the message.

<Callout type="info">
  Native `component` parts are first-class assistant message parts with shape
  `{ type: "component", name, props?, parentId? }`. They render through
  `MessagePrimitive.Parts` and `MessagePrimitive.Unstable_PartsGrouped` via
  `components.Component` (`by_name`, `Fallback`, `Override`).
  Legacy `aui/v0` serialization does not support `component` parts.
</Callout>

<ParametersTable
  type="MessagePrimitiveContentProps"
  parameters={[
    {
      name: "components",
      required: false,
      type: "ContentPartComponents",
      description: "The components to render for each content part.",
      children: [
        {
          type: "ContentPartComponents",
          parameters: [
            {
              name: "Text",
              type: "TextContentPartComponent",
              description:
                "The component to render for each text content part.",
            },
            {
              name: "Image",
              type: "ImageContentPartComponent",
              description:
                "The component to render for each image content part.",
            },
            {
              name: "Source",
              type: "SourceContentPartComponent",
              description:
                "The component to render for each source content part.",
            },
            {
              name: "File",
              type: "FileContentPartComponent",
              description:
                "The component to render for each file content part.",
            },
            {
              name: "Unstable_Audio",
              type: "Unstable_AudioContentPartComponent",
              description:
                "The component to render for each audio content part.",
            },
            {
              name: "Component",
              type: "object",
              description:
                "Configuration for native component message parts (`type: \"component\"`).",
              children: [
                {
                  parameters: [
                    {
                      name: "by_name",
                      type: "Record<string, ComponentMessagePartComponent>",
                      description:
                        "A map of component names to renderer components.",
                    },
                    {
                      name: "Fallback",
                      type: "ComponentMessagePartComponent",
                      description:
                        "Fallback renderer used when no `by_name` entry exists.",
                    },
                    {
                      name: "Override",
                      type: "ComponentMessagePartComponent",
                      description:
                        "Single renderer that handles all component message parts.",
                    },
                  ],
                },
              ],
            },
            {
              name: "tools",
              type: "object",
              description:
                "The component to render for each tool call content part.",
              children: [
                {
                  parameters: [
                    {
                      name: "by_name",
                      type: "Record<string, ToolCallContentPartComponent>",
                      description:
                        "The components to render for each tool call content part.",
                    },
                    {
                      name: "Fallback",
                      type: "ToolCallContentPartComponent",
                      description:
                        "The fallback component to render for tool call content parts.",
                    },
                  ],
                },
              ],
            },
            {
              name: "ToolGroup",
              type: "ComponentType<PropsWithChildren<{ startIndex: number; endIndex: number }>>",
              description:
                "Component for rendering grouped consecutive tool calls. When provided, consecutive tool-call content parts will be automatically grouped and wrapped with this component.",
              children: [
                {
                  type: "ToolGroupProps",
                  parameters: [
                    {
                      name: "startIndex",
                      type: "number",
                      description: "Index of the first tool call in the group.",
                      required: true,
                    },
                    {
                      name: "endIndex",
                      type: "number",
                      description: "Index of the last tool call in the group.",
                      required: true,
                    },
                    {
                      name: "children",
                      type: "ReactNode",
                      description:
                        "The rendered tool call components within the group.",
                      required: true,
                    },
                  ],
                },
              ],
            },
          ],
        },
      ],
    },
  ]}
/>

### PartByIndex

Renders a single message part at the specified index.

```tsx
<MessagePrimitive.PartByIndex
  index={0}
  components={{
    Text: MyTextComponent,
    Image: MyImageComponent
  }}
/>
```

<ParametersTable
  type="MessagePrimitive.PartByIndex.Props"
  parameters={[
    {
      name: "index",
      type: "number",
      required: true,
      description: "The index of the message part to render.",
    },
    {
      name: "components",
      required: false,
      type: "ContentPartComponents",
      description: "The components to render for the message part.",
    },
  ]}
/>

```tsx
<MessagePrimitive.Parts
  components={{
    Component: {
      by_name: {
        "status-chip": ({ props }) => (
          <StatusChip label={String(props?.label ?? "")} />
        ),
      },
      Fallback: ({ name }) => <div>Unknown component: {name}</div>,
    },
  }}
/>
```

### Attachments

Renders all attachments of the message.

<ParametersTable
  type="MessagePrimitive.Attachments.Props"
  parameters={[
    {
      name: "components",
      type: "AttachmentComponents",
      description: "The components to render for each attachment.",
      children: [
        {
          type: "AttachmentComponents",
          parameters: [
            {
              name: "Image",
              type: "ComponentType",
              description: "The component to render for image attachments.",
            },
            {
              name: "Document",
              type: "ComponentType",
              description: "The component to render for document attachments.",
            },
            {
              name: "File",
              type: "ComponentType",
              description: "The component to render for file attachments.",
            },
            {
              name: "Attachment",
              type: "ComponentType",
              description: "The fallback component to render for any attachment type.",
            },
          ],
        },
      ],
    },
  ]}
/>

### AttachmentByIndex

Renders a single attachment at the specified index within the message.

```tsx
<MessagePrimitive.AttachmentByIndex
  index={0}
  components={{
    Image: MyImageAttachment,
    Document: MyDocumentAttachment
  }}
/>
```

<ParametersTable
  type="MessagePrimitive.AttachmentByIndex.Props"
  parameters={[
    {
      name: "index",
      type: "number",
      required: true,
      description: "The index of the attachment to render.",
    },
    {
      name: "components",
      type: "AttachmentComponents",
      description: "The components to render for the attachment.",
    },
  ]}
/>

### useMessageQuote()

A hook that returns the quote info attached to the current message, if any. Reads from `message.metadata.custom.quote`.

```tsx
import { useMessageQuote } from "@assistant-ui/react";

const QuoteBlock = () => {
  const quote = useMessageQuote();
  if (!quote) return null;

  return (
    <div className="mb-2 flex items-start gap-1.5 text-sm italic text-muted-foreground">
      {quote.text}
    </div>
  );
};
```

**Returns:** `QuoteInfo | undefined`

```typescript
type QuoteInfo = {
  readonly text: string;       // the quoted plain text
  readonly messageId: string;  // the source message ID
};
```

<Callout type="info">
See the [Quoting guide](/docs/guides/quoting) for a complete walkthrough.
</Callout>

### Error

Renders children only if the message has an error status.

```tsx
<MessagePrimitive.Error>
  {/* rendered if the message has an error status */}
  <ErrorPrimitive.Root>
    <ErrorPrimitive.Message />
  </ErrorPrimitive.Root>
</MessagePrimitive.Error>
```

Commit message:

docs: mark interactive component contracts experimental

apps/docs/content/docs/(reference)/api-reference/primitives/message.mdx, after:

---
title: MessagePrimitive
description: Components for rendering message content, parts, and attachments.
---

A single message in a conversation. Messages may consist of multiple parts.


## Anatomy

```tsx
import { MessagePrimitive } from "@assistant-ui/react";

const UserMessage = () => (
  <MessagePrimitive.Root>
    User: <MessagePrimitive.Parts />
    <BranchPicker />
    <ActionBar />
  </MessagePrimitive.Root>
);

const AssistantMessage = () => (
  <MessagePrimitive.Root>
    Assistant: <MessagePrimitive.Parts />
    <BranchPicker />
    <ActionBar />
  </MessagePrimitive.Root>
);
```

## API Reference

### Root

Containts all parts of the message.

This primitive renders a `<div>` element unless `asChild` is set.

<ParametersTable
  type="MessagePrimitiveRootProps"
  parameters={[
    {
      name: "asChild",
    },
  ]}
/>

### Parts

The content of the message. This renders a separate component for each content part of the message.

<Callout type="info">
  Native `component` parts are first-class assistant message parts with shape
  `{ type: "component", name, props?, parentId? }`. They render through
  `MessagePrimitive.Parts` and `MessagePrimitive.Unstable_PartsGrouped` via
  `components.Component` (`by_name`, `Fallback`, `Override`).
  Component-part interaction contracts are experimental and may change in
  future releases.
  Legacy `aui/v0` serialization does not support `component` parts.
</Callout>

<ParametersTable
  type="MessagePrimitiveContentProps"
  parameters={[
    {
      name: "components",
      required: false,
      type: "ContentPartComponents",
      description: "The components to render for each content part.",
      children: [
        {
          type: "ContentPartComponents",
          parameters: [
            {
              name: "Text",
              type: "TextContentPartComponent",
              description:
                "The component to render for each text content part.",
            },
            {
              name: "Image",
              type: "ImageContentPartComponent",
              description:
                "The component to render for each image content part.",
            },
            {
              name: "Source",
              type: "SourceContentPartComponent",
              description:
                "The component to render for each source content part.",
            },
            {
              name: "File",
              type: "FileContentPartComponent",
              description:
                "The component to render for each file content part.",
            },
            {
              name: "Unstable_Audio",
              type: "Unstable_AudioContentPartComponent",
              description:
                "The component to render for each audio content part.",
            },
            {
              name: "Component",
              type: "object",
              description:
                "Configuration for native component message parts (`type: \"component\"`).",
              children: [
                {
                  parameters: [
                    {
                      name: "by_name",
                      type: "Record<string, ComponentMessagePartComponent>",
                      description:
                        "A map of component names to renderer components.",
                    },
                    {
                      name: "Fallback",
                      type: "ComponentMessagePartComponent",
                      description:
                        "Fallback renderer used when no `by_name` entry exists.",
                    },
                    {
                      name: "Override",
                      type: "ComponentMessagePartComponent",
                      description:
                        "Single renderer that handles all component message parts.",
                    },
                  ],
                },
              ],
            },
            {
              name: "tools",
              type: "object",
              description:
                "The component to render for each tool call content part.",
              children: [
                {
                  parameters: [
                    {
                      name: "by_name",
                      type: "Record<string, ToolCallContentPartComponent>",
                      description:
                        "The components to render for each tool call content part.",
                    },
                    {
                      name: "Fallback",
                      type: "ToolCallContentPartComponent",
                      description:
                        "The fallback component to render for tool call content parts.",
                    },
                  ],
                },
              ],
            },
            {
              name: "ToolGroup",
              type: "ComponentType<PropsWithChildren<{ startIndex: number; endIndex: number }>>",
              description:
                "Component for rendering grouped consecutive tool calls. When provided, consecutive tool-call content parts will be automatically grouped and wrapped with this component.",
              children: [
                {
                  type: "ToolGroupProps",
                  parameters: [
                    {
                      name: "startIndex",
                      type: "number",
                      description: "Index of the first tool call in the group.",
                      required: true,
                    },
                    {
                      name: "endIndex",
                      type: "number",
                      description: "Index of the last tool call in the group.",
                      required: true,
                    },
                    {
                      name: "children",
                      type: "ReactNode",
                      description:
                        "The rendered tool call components within the group.",
                      required: true,
                    },
                  ],
                },
              ],
            },
          ],
        },
      ],
    },
  ]}
/>

### PartByIndex

Renders a single message part at the specified index.

```tsx
<MessagePrimitive.PartByIndex
  index={0}
  components={{
    Text: MyTextComponent,
    Image: MyImageComponent
  }}
/>
```

<ParametersTable
  type="MessagePrimitive.PartByIndex.Props"
  parameters={[
    {
      name: "index",
      type: "number",
      required: true,
      description: "The index of the message part to render.",
    },
    {
      name: "components",
      required: false,
      type: "ContentPartComponents",
      description: "The components to render for the message part.",
    },
  ]}
/>

```tsx
<MessagePrimitive.Parts
  components={{
    Component: {
      by_name: {
        "status-chip": ({ props }) => (
          <StatusChip label={String(props?.label ?? "")} />
        ),
      },
      Fallback: ({ name }) => <div>Unknown component: {name}</div>,
    },
  }}
/>
```

### Attachments

Renders all attachments of the message.

<ParametersTable
  type="MessagePrimitive.Attachments.Props"
  parameters={[
    {
      name: "components",
      type: "AttachmentComponents",
      description: "The components to render for each attachment.",
      children: [
        {
          type: "AttachmentComponents",
          parameters: [
            {
              name: "Image",
              type: "ComponentType",
              description: "The component to render for image attachments.",
            },
            {
              name: "Document",
              type: "ComponentType",
              description: "The component to render for document attachments.",
            },
            {
              name: "File",
              type: "ComponentType",
              description: "The component to render for file attachments.",
            },
            {
              name: "Attachment",
              type: "ComponentType",
              description: "The fallback component to render for any attachment type.",
            },
          ],
        },
      ],
    },
  ]}
/>

### AttachmentByIndex

Renders a single attachment at the specified index within the message.

```tsx
<MessagePrimitive.AttachmentByIndex
  index={0}
  components={{
    Image: MyImageAttachment,
    Document: MyDocumentAttachment
  }}
/>
```

<ParametersTable
  type="MessagePrimitive.AttachmentByIndex.Props"
  parameters={[
    {
      name: "index",
      type: "number",
      required: true,
      description: "The index of the attachment to render.",
    },
    {
      name: "components",
      type: "AttachmentComponents",
      description: "The components to render for the attachment.",
    },
  ]}
/>

### useMessageQuote()

A hook that returns the quote info attached to the current message, if any. Reads from `message.metadata.custom.quote`.

```tsx
import { useMessageQuote } from "@assistant-ui/react";

const QuoteBlock = () => {
  const quote = useMessageQuote();
  if (!quote) return null;

  return (
    <div className="mb-2 flex items-start gap-1.5 text-sm italic text-muted-foreground">
      {quote.text}
    </div>
  );
};
```

**Returns:** `QuoteInfo | undefined`

```typescript
type QuoteInfo = {
  readonly text: string;       // the quoted plain text
  readonly messageId: string;  // the source message ID
};
```

<Callout type="info">
See the [Quoting guide](/docs/guides/quoting) for a complete walkthrough.
</Callout>

### Error

Renders children only if the message has an error status.

```tsx
<MessagePrimitive.Error>
  {/* rendered if the message has an error status */}
  <ErrorPrimitive.Root>
    <ErrorPrimitive.Message />
  </ErrorPrimitive.Root>
</MessagePrimitive.Error>
```
